---
layout: post
title: A letter to my MP regarding LGBTQ+ conversion therapy
---

This is a copy of an email I sent to my local MP today, regarding a survey
being run by the House of Commons on LGBTQ+ conversion therapy. It seemed worth
publishing here too.

---

I am writing regarding the conversion therapy survey shared by the House of
Commons account on Twitter:

<https://twitter.com/HouseofCommons/status/1279000022189817857>

I am deeply concerned that this matter has been put to a public survey.  The
government should be able to move ahead with plans to ban conversion therapy
without a survey, especially given that these plans were announced two years
ago.

The evidence against this practice is overwhelming; it is neither ethically nor
practically justifiable, achieving nothing other than traumatising LGBTQ+
people and reinforcing the homophobic and transphobic attitude that being
LGBTQ+ is something which is possible or desirable to "fix". The practice is
rejected by countless medical and psychiatric organisations throughout the
world. To put this question up for a public consultation is to specifically
invite people to defend the practice, and to make space for them to do so.

I am particularly concerned by the question of how 'conversion therapy' should
be defined. Specifically, I am concerned that there will be an attempt to
define gender-affirming treatments for transgender people as a kind of
conversion therapy. These two things should absolutely not be conflated:
conversion therapy seeks to reject people's true identities, whereas
gender-affirming treatments for transgender people affirm their true
identities.

Transgender people report extremely high rates of discrimination, as well as
significantly higher rates of depression and suicidal thoughts than the general
population. Providing appropriate treatment to trans people is a vital
component of righting this. It would therefore be immensely harmful if the
government adopted the view that treatment for transgender people should be
classed as 'conversion therapy'.

I would like to hear what you intend to do to resist these developments, and
how you intend to speak out against homophobia and transphobia, as well as how
you intend to hold the government to account for making this topic a matter for
debate.

Best wishes,

Harry Garrood
