stuff-i-made/index.markdown, before:

---
layout: default
title: Stuff I made
---

## Stuff I made

### Multiplayer Pacman

* live, at: <https://mpac.herokuapp.com>
* source: <https://github.com/hdgarrood/multipac>

A multiplayer version of the classic Pacman game. The server and the client
were both written in PureScript, a Haskell-like language which compiles to
JavaScript.

### Redmine release notes plugin

* source: <https://github.com/hdgarrood/redmine_release_notes>

A plugin for the open-source bug tracking and project management system,
Redmine.

### King of the Network

* download from:
  <https://docs.google.com/file/d/0B2TmqHg3DPXLblUtbUh4bmE4cVk/edit>

The winning entry to the Edinburgh University GameDevSoc Game Jam 2013. The
theme was 'networks'. We used GameMaker, so there's only an EXE file. It seems
to work well under Wine though.

### Down the Rabbit Hole

* source: <https://github.com/hdgarrood/inf1-fp-competition>

Won joint 1st place in the Edinburgh University Functional Programming
Competition in 2013. It is a zoom sequence of the Mandelbrot set, written
in Haskell.

### klasma

* source: <https://github.com/hdgarrood/klasma>

A program for composing chiptune music. Reads a text file containing a
description of a track in a purpose-built domain specific language, and turns
it into music.

### Tank game

* play: [here](./tank-game)

Just a little game I put together in JavaScript. It runs in the browser.

Commit message:

Add purescript-sequences to stuff-i-made

stuff-i-made/index.markdown, after:

---
layout: default
title: Stuff I made
---

## Stuff I made

### Multiplayer Pacman

* live, at: <https://mpac.herokuapp.com>
* source: <https://github.com/hdgarrood/multipac>

A multiplayer version of the classic Pacman game. The server and the client
were both written in PureScript, a Haskell-like language which compiles to
JavaScript.

### purescript-sequences

* source: <https://github.com/hdgarrood/purescript-sequences>

An efficient, general-purpose sequence type for PureScript. This library offers
a data structure designed for use in PureScript code, in order to take
advantage of immutability: giving benefits related to both time complexity of
operations and memory churn.

### Redmine release notes plugin

* source: <https://github.com/hdgarrood/redmine_release_notes>

A plugin for the open-source bug tracking and project management system,
Redmine.

### King of the Network

* download from:
  <https://docs.google.com/file/d/0B2TmqHg3DPXLblUtbUh4bmE4cVk/edit>

The winning entry to the Edinburgh University GameDevSoc Game Jam 2013. The
theme was 'networks'. We used GameMaker, so there's only an EXE file. It seems
to work well under Wine though.

### Down the Rabbit Hole

* source: <https://github.com/hdgarrood/inf1-fp-competition>

Won joint 1st place in the Edinburgh University Functional Programming
Competition in 2013. It is a zoom sequence of the Mandelbrot set, written
in Haskell.

### klasma

* source: <https://github.com/hdgarrood/klasma>

A program for composing chiptune music. Reads a text file containing a
description of a track in a purpose-built domain specific language, and turns
it into music.

### Tank game

* play: [here](./tank-game)

Just a little game I put together in JavaScript. It runs in the browser.
